hi so I just want to make a few quick
remarks about the Jordan Peterson Dave
Rubin you're on Brook and Gregg's helm
eerie discussion that happened recently
so this promised to be an interesting
encounter given Iran and the
Objectivists view on economics and so I
was really looking for some interesting
discussion based around the ideas that
seemed to be percolating at the moment
with respect to people losing their jobs
and automation is coming and so what do
we do as a society if people start
losing their jobs and or just some of
the discussion about collectivism when
it comes to economics and how to
maintain social cohesion when we have
such divergent views about the role of
the individual when it comes to creating
wealth
none of these economic discussions who
ever broached we never really got into
the real area of expertise that I think
the Objectivists do have and have
something to teach people instead we got
bogged down on questions of epistemology
now of course I'm interested in
epistemology and I like listening to
discussions that people have there are
various kinds of ways in which they
think that knowledge is formed but it's
a little frustrating it's frustrating
when we don't have a voice that can
clearly articulate some of the ways in
which we know knowledge is constructed
instead we have people's people's pet
ideas or ways in which people might have
reasoned through these issues themselves
let's just let's just listen to what
what some of them say
we come up with concepts concepts enable
us to so we can learn about future
instances from past ones now he said
there that there's some interesting
differences perhaps between himself as
an Objectivist and jordan Peterson and
Sam Harris when it comes to this concept
of reason what reason means now what we
learnt here in a moment is how the
Objectivist conception of reason is very
very broad and it's so broad number
alert almost anything done with the
human mind might be considered reason so
long as it doesn't lead into
irrationality on the other hand what we
hear from jordan is that his conception
of reason is something similar to logic
it's almost synonymous with logic it's
the ability to think in a mathematical
type way to get from one claim to
another in such a way as that it's valid
it doesn't allow for anything beyond a
deduction as far as I can tell
what Sam and Jordyn and Greg here and
and even your on all appreciating and
indeed what per periods appreciate as
well is that deduction cannot possibly
be the way that knowledge is generated
all the deduction allows you to do is to
figure out what claim follows logically
from what's it whatever set of axioms
you're starting with
or from whatever previous claims you've
made so you have these rules of
inference that you follow and if you
follow them then you're liable to end up
not producing errors that you would have
if you hadn't followed them so logic is
kind of an error correcting mechanism
it's it's a way of thinking through the
consequences of the ideas that you have
but it can't create the ideas in the
first place and this has been a historic
problem for philosophers of science
since anyone's been thinking about these
issues given that deduction is a way in
which you ensure that the conclusions
you have valid given some set of
premises that you have how is it that
you get the premises in the first place
how is it you arrive at these ideas that
you think are correct or that solve a
particular problem in the first place
the solution to this has traditionally
been that if deduction doesn't work
induction must work so we invent a new
word because deduction just allows us to
show how specific instances are correct
given some general principle so once we
have the general principle then we can
determine what follows from those
general principles in particular how do
we apply it to specific situations we've
got the general idea
we're encounter a specific situation
deduction allows us to apply that
general rule to a specific situation but
as for coming up with the general rule
in the first place the very purpose of
ion's deductions no help so therefore
the only answer traditionally that's
been offered is this thing called
induction an induction is where you
simply go out into the world to observe
reality and from it you somehow read the
general rule and usually it's as simple
as extrapolating you generalize you see
the same thing happen a number of times
and you just presume that it will
continue to happen
my favorite example here has always been
the boiling of water you boil water for
four minutes and every single minute it
climbs by 20 degrees Celsius then you
expect on the fifth minute it will climb
by another 20 degrees Celsius and so you
have a rule that applying this amount of
heat for this amount of time causes a
rise in temperature of 20 degrees
Celsius of course if you think that is a
rule that is valid to draw a valid to
extrapolate given the set of
observations then you're liable to think
that water is going to continue to rise
in temperature no matter how long you
heat it
but anyway is actually bothered to heat
water we'll know that once you get to
the boiling point of water usually about
a hundred degrees Celsius at sea level
the temperature no longer rises the
temperature even though you're heating
the water remains and 100 degrees
Celsius and no amount of observing past
instances of water increasing in
temperature upon the application of heat
could ever have told you that so we have
a problem and we have a problem that
merely observing things in the world
even if a pattern is being followed
cannot possibly give us the general
rules that govern the world that's not
the way it works the per perience ed or
Karl Popper tried to explain that
induction can't be the way in which we
generate theories now he did say that if
you want to demarcate science from the
rest of science forget about trying to
confirm things via some sort of
inductive validation
instead what you should be trying to do
is to refute your theory where you can
and so this was the line of demarcation
and he never argued that this kind of
experimental refutation was a
straightforward thing instead it's
highly complex and there are ways in
which your attempts at refutation when
they appear to be refutation so when
they appear to be falsifications might
not be proper covered all this but more
importantly for this particular
discussion we do not have an answer as
to how we arrive at these creative
conjectures in the first place we know
that we do we know that we human beings
are unique so far as we can tell in the
universe at being able to conjecture
solutions to problems we encounter to
explain the world around us to reflect
the reality that's out there
within our own minds but that act of
reflecting what is out there in here is
not an act of reading which is the kind
of sense we're going to get in a moment
this idea that somehow the facts of
reality are there and if only we could
decipher them then we'd have access to
the ontological truth we would derive
the ontological truth but this is not
why it works reality's a mess it's out
there it's outside of our minds and so
our minds have to conjecture to create
what it is that's happening out there in
language using symbols in our
interactions with one another what we
try and do is to conjure the symbols and
the language in such a way as to explain
to reflect to replicate the reality
that's out there in our explanations our
explanations become a part of reality
independent of us but they arose from
within us and then are tested against
the external reality but they are not
read
the reality and this is the mistake I
think that we will hear from Jordan and
from our objectives philosophers and
it's the the kind of mistake you do tend
to hear from Sam house you hear it from
anyone who's not a perp Irian decided
that because reality is objective out
there beyond our minds and we all agree
on that that this means that somehow
rather we need to have a process of
reading directly from the book of
reality as though science were written
in the language of maths as it is
sometimes said but this simply isn't the
case mathematics like any other language
that we use to describe reality it's
something that we have created and yes
once we've created it it has an
independent reality of its own but this
should not be to say that there is some
kind of 1 to 1 correspondence between
the creations that we have in order to
explain the world namely our knowledge
and the reality itself the links between
the knowledge that we have and the
ontological reality that's out there
conjectures they're fallible conjectures
they need to be refined and changed and
sometimes completely overturned we can
be absolutely wrong about the connection
between our knowledge and the thing that
it is knowledge of or the thing that
it's attempting to explain those things
can be mistaken it's always the case
so here Jordan is reaching for a an
answer to how is that the people are
creative and he's right to think that
this is a mystery and our Objectivist
philosopher is about to agree with him
that this indeed is a mystery now Jordan
wants to say it seems to want to say
that reason is should be narrowly
construed as something like logic that
it's merely the sterilized way of
speaking about science ah spill or
coming to arrive at conclusions
just happens in mathematics that it is
not to do with creativity that we
understand reason really well and our
Objectivist philosophy is about to say
something along the lines of well we
don't understand it it includes more
than your narrow conception he'd be
right about that but I think it becomes
a little bit
yes so here we have the idea that reason
is broad that it includes a whole raft
of different processes that might be
regarded in a per curiam view as error
correction mechanisms now in both of
them agreed then that there's this
mystery to do with creativity now the
fact that we don't understand how
knowledge is created how it is we were
able to generate explanations about the
world this is really interesting and
Jordan indeed invokes often in his talks
artificial intelligence and how people
who program artificial intelligence have
great difficulty in trying to program
the senses of especially the robots the
embodied robots that he likes to talk
about in order for them to distinguish
objects out there in the world because
he's fond of saying there are an
infinite number of ways in which one can
interpret the world and postmodernist
would say that we're given that fact
then therefore there's no privileged way
of interpreting the world and Jordans
and pinyin is of course that there are
some ways that work and some ways that
don't work and the great difficulty in
artificial intelligence is trying to
place values into the artificial
artificial intelligence systems such
that they're able to have a value system
which enables them to determine what's
going to work and what doesn't okay
that's one issue and and it's important
to know that we're hinting there at
there's something very unusual about
people people are able to generate
explanations they're able to have values
they're able to figure out what works in
the world but how it is that we're able
to create these explanations in the
first place at the moment is a complete
mystery we don't know what it is we know
that we have knowledge and that we're
able to come up with new knowledge it
must be the case that the new knowledge
that we come up with is some kind of
modification to the existing knowledge
that we have when we look at specific
examples in the history of science such
as Einstein coming up with an
improvement over the existing theory of
gravity
such that it completely undermined the
previous existing theory of gravity it
didn't seem to be a meme modification it
wasn't just that Einstein took Newton's
universal theory of gravitation which
was the inverse square law and then
tweaked it a little bit it didn't become
an inverse 2 ^ sorry it didn't become an
F equals G m1 m2 over R to the power of
two point zero zero zero zero 1 or
something like that okay it was a it was
a complete change in conception about
how gravity works how how did he come up
with this this completely new theory it
doesn't appear like it was a
modification of the existing theory of
gravity but it must have been a
modification of something and indeed it
was that used existing theories of
geometry it used some of our Galilean
relativity it used some concepts that
were already there in electricity and
magnetism somehow the genius of Einstein
was able to move beyond the theories
that existed and to change them in a way
that wasn't completely foreign to people
after it was completely foreign to
people it would have taken much longer
for it to have caught on to the degree
that it is such that it's actually now
in forming technology such that we know
that it must contain truth given that it
works but the process whereby Einstein
came up with the theory in the first
place doesn't appear to be some logical
process which is why I sometimes
interpret Papa's book the logic of
scientific discovery as being itself a
question was there a logic of scientific
discovery and I've always thought no
there's not there's no recipe that one
can follow in order to gain scientific
truth there is a logic to follow to some
extent when we want to whittle away
false claims from true claims or false
claims from claims yet to be shown false
this is what the experimental method is
about this is what criticism is about
this is how the refutation in conjecture
and refutation earns its keep that there
are useful strategies to employ no
matter what the domain you're interested
in whether it's mathematics science
history your own personal life where the
correct application of criticism will
enable you to figure out what is a
better compared to a worse course of
action but the conjecture part of that
the conjecture side of the coin is very
very hard to articulate if you want to
know what the rules are in order to come
up with a good conjecture once you've
got a conjecture we've got some good
ideas about what to do with it but
arriving at the conjecture in the first
place is very difficult and is even more
difficult to explain I would argue we
don't have a theory of how conjectures
are formed or how creativity works and
this is what the present discussion
between Jordan and his interlocutors
seems to be focused on and it's a little
bit of a stumbling block as it should be
I think it's misguided in many many ways
not least because they don't see
knowledge creation as a process of
conjecture and then correcting errors
because that's what the application of
Reason really should be considered as
it's an attempt to correct errors in
theories you've already guessed
it's a minor point I mean we can pass
over it without comment that I'm a
parent so let's linger here for a moment
the Rumba doesn't have a brain but it is
intelligent now this is a bias if we
want to call a brain that bit of wetware
that exists inside of skulls of mammals
or other vertebrates very well however
if you want to think about these issues
in a non parochial way better to just
think of a brain as some bit of hardware
consisting of a processor and memory
upon which a program can run which
enables an organism or a robot to find
its way through the world now in the
case of people many people know my views
on this people have a special kind of
program that runs on that brain hardware
and that's called the mind and the mind
is that entity in the universe which is
able to generate explanations it's
synonymous with being a person it's a
general intelligence it's a universal
explainer all of these things mean
basically the same thing a mind is a
very special program but program
nonetheless a brain is a computer it's a
kind of computer that organisms use but
there is nothing in terms of the
hardware that makes it impossible in
principle not to capture every single
capacity of it in a silicon-based
computer
well I think this is a straw man i-i-i
just can't see the argument for anyone
enlightenment or otherwise suggesting
that disembodied reason is a thing that
in some sense you can have reason that
fight flies completely free of the mind
in some way the mind can't be
disembodied this is religious type
thinking reason is the process of
attempting to find errors in your
existing theories that's it
and and it's a thing that people do it's
not a thing that can be done by any
other kind of entity in the universe now
when I say people of course I mean
artificial general intelligence aliens
if they're out there but people people
need to reason in order to figure out
what's true from what's false or what's
beautiful from what's ugly and so on
reason to me is synonymous with a
critical attitude